.TH HPP-STDLIB 3 "2026-03-23" "H++ 1.0" "H++ Standard Library"
.SH NAME
hpp-stdlib \- H++ standard library functions
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
\fBimport std/io;\fR
\fBimport std/fmt;\fR
\fBimport std/mem;\fR
\fBimport std/str;\fR
\fBimport std/arr;\fR
\fBimport std/time;\fR
\fBimport std/rand;\fR
\fBimport std/proc;\fR
\fBimport std/sys;\fR
\fBimport std/net;\fR
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
The H++ standard library provides functions for I/O, memory, strings, arrays,
time, random numbers, and raw Linux syscalls. Import with
\fBimport std;\fR for everything or \fBimport std/{io,fmt};\fR for specific modules.
.SH std/io \- INPUT/OUTPUT
.SS Output
.TP
\fBprint_char\fR(\fIc\fR: int)
Print single character (low byte).
.TP
\fBprint_newline\fR()
Print newline (\\n).
.TP
\fBprint_str\fR(\fIbuf\fR: long, \fIlen\fR: long)
Print \fIlen\fR bytes from \fIbuf\fR to stdout.
.TP
\fBputs\fR(\fIs\fR: long)
Print null-terminated string to stdout (no newline).
.TP
\fBprintln\fR(\fIs\fR: long)
Print null-terminated string + newline.
.TP
\fBeputs\fR(\fIs\fR: long)
Print null-terminated string to stderr.
.TP
\fBeprint_str\fR(\fIbuf\fR: long, \fIlen\fR: long)
Print \fIlen\fR bytes to stderr.
.SS Input
.TP
\fBread_char\fR() -> int
Read one byte from stdin. Returns -1 on EOF.
.TP
\fBread_stdin\fR(\fIbuf\fR: long, \fImax\fR: long) -> long
Read up to \fImax\fR bytes from stdin. Returns bytes read.
.SS File Operations
.TP
\fBfile_open_read\fR(\fIpath\fR: long) -> int
Open file for reading. Returns fd or negative on error.
.TP
\fBfile_open_write\fR(\fIpath\fR: long) -> int
Open/create file for writing (truncates). Returns fd.
.TP
\fBfile_open_append\fR(\fIpath\fR: long) -> int
Open/create file for appending. Returns fd.
.TP
\fBfile_read\fR(\fIfd\fR: int, \fIbuf\fR: long, \fIcount\fR: long) -> long
Read from file descriptor.
.TP
\fBfile_write\fR(\fIfd\fR: int, \fIbuf\fR: long, \fIcount\fR: long) -> long
Write to file descriptor.
.TP
\fBfile_close\fR(\fIfd\fR: int) -> int
Close file descriptor.
.TP
\fBfile_size\fR(\fIfd\fR: int) -> long
Get file size in bytes.
.SH std/fmt \- FORMATTING
.TP
\fBprint_int\fR(\fIn\fR: int)
Print unsigned 32-bit integer as decimal.
.TP
\fBprint_long\fR(\fIn\fR: long)
Print unsigned 64-bit integer as decimal.
.TP
\fBprint_signed\fR(\fIn\fR: int)
Print signed 32-bit integer.
.TP
\fBprint_hex\fR(\fIn\fR: long)
Print as hexadecimal with 0x prefix.
.TP
\fBitoa\fR(\fIn\fR: int, \fIbuf\fR: long) -> long
Convert integer to string in buffer. Returns length.
.TP
\fBatoi\fR(\fIs\fR: long) -> int
Convert decimal string to integer.
.SH std/mem \- MEMORY
.SS Allocation
.TP
\fBalloc\fR(\fIsize\fR: long) -> long
Allocate \fIsize\fR bytes via mmap. Returns pointer or 0 on failure.
.TP
\fBfree\fR(\fIaddr\fR: long, \fIsize\fR: long) -> int
Free allocation. \fIsize\fR must match the original alloc.
.TP
\fBrealloc\fR(\fIold\fR: long, \fIold_size\fR: long, \fInew_size\fR: long) -> long
Resize allocation. May move data. Returns new pointer or 0.
.SS Operations
.TP
\fBmem_copy\fR(\fIdst\fR: long, \fIsrc\fR: long, \fIn\fR: long)
Copy \fIn\fR bytes from \fIsrc\fR to \fIdst\fR.
.TP
\fBmem_set\fR(\fIdst\fR: long, \fIval\fR: int, \fIn\fR: long)
Fill \fIn\fR bytes with \fIval\fR.
.TP
\fBmem_cmp\fR(\fIa\fR: long, \fIb\fR: long, \fIn\fR: long) -> int
Compare \fIn\fR bytes. Returns 0 if equal.
.TP
\fBmem_zero\fR(\fIdst\fR: long, \fIn\fR: long)
Zero \fIn\fR bytes.
.SS Typed Access
.TP
\fBmem_read8\fR / \fBmem_read16\fR / \fBmem_read32\fR / \fBmem_read64\fR(\fIptr\fR: long, \fIoffset\fR: int) -> int|long
Read 1/2/4/8 bytes at ptr+offset.
.TP
\fBmem_write8\fR / \fBmem_write16\fR / \fBmem_write32\fR / \fBmem_write64\fR(\fIptr\fR: long, \fIoffset\fR: int, \fIval\fR: int|long)
Write 1/2/4/8 bytes at ptr+offset.
.SH std/str \- STRINGS
.TP
\fBstr_len\fR(\fIs\fR: long) -> long
Length of null-terminated string.
.TP
\fBstr_eq\fR(\fIa\fR: long, \fIb\fR: long) -> int
1 if strings are equal, 0 otherwise.
.TP
\fBstr_copy\fR(\fIdst\fR: long, \fIsrc\fR: long) -> long
Copy null-terminated string. Returns \fIdst\fR.
.TP
\fBstr_cat\fR(\fIdst\fR: long, \fIsrc\fR: long) -> long
Append \fIsrc\fR to end of \fIdst\fR. Returns \fIdst\fR.
.TP
\fBstr_chr\fR(\fIs\fR: long, \fIc\fR: int) -> long
Find first occurrence of byte \fIc\fR. Returns pointer or 0.
.SH std/arr \- ARRAYS
.SS Byte Arrays
\fBbyte_new\fR, \fBbyte_free\fR, \fBbyte_get\fR, \fBbyte_set\fR, \fBbyte_fill\fR, \fBbyte_copy\fR
.SS Int Arrays
\fBint_new\fR, \fBint_free\fR, \fBint_get\fR, \fBint_set\fR, \fBint_fill\fR, \fBint_copy\fR, \fBint_swap\fR, \fBint_find\fR, \fBint_sum\fR, \fBint_min\fR, \fBint_max\fR, \fBint_reverse\fR, \fBint_sort\fR, \fBint_print\fR
.SS Long Arrays
\fBlong_new\fR, \fBlong_free\fR, \fBlong_get\fR, \fBlong_set\fR, \fBlong_fill\fR, \fBlong_copy\fR, \fBlong_swap\fR
.PP
Array syntax sugar: \fBarr[i]\fR reads, \fBarr[i] = val\fR writes.
Declaration: \fBint arr[5];\fR or \fBint arr[] = [1,2,3];\fR
.SH std/time \- TIME
.TP
\fBsleep_ms\fR(\fIms\fR: int)
Sleep for \fIms\fR milliseconds.
.TP
\fBsleep_sec\fR(\fIsec\fR: int)
Sleep for \fIsec\fR seconds.
.TP
\fBget_time_sec\fR() -> long
Unix timestamp in seconds.
.SH std/rand \- RANDOM
.TP
\fBrandom_int\fR() -> int
Random 32-bit unsigned integer.
.TP
\fBrandom_bytes\fR(\fIbuf\fR: long, \fIcount\fR: long) -> long
Fill \fIbuf\fR with \fIcount\fR random bytes. Returns bytes written.
.SH std/proc \- PROCESS
.TP
\fBexit\fR(\fIcode\fR: int)
Exit process immediately.
.TP
\fBabort\fR()
Kill process with SIGABRT.
.SH std/sys \- SYSCALLS
73 raw Linux x86-64 syscall wrappers, all named \fBsys_<name>\fR.
.PP
\fBFile I/O:\fR sys_read, sys_write, sys_open, sys_close, sys_stat, sys_fstat,
sys_lstat, sys_lseek, sys_pread64, sys_pwrite64, sys_access, sys_pipe,
sys_dup, sys_dup2, sys_fcntl, sys_fsync, sys_truncate, sys_ftruncate,
sys_rename, sys_unlink, sys_readlink, sys_chmod, sys_fchmod, sys_chown
.PP
\fBMemory:\fR sys_mmap, sys_mprotect, sys_munmap, sys_brk, sys_mremap
.PP
\fBProcess:\fR sys_getpid, sys_fork, sys_execve, sys_exit, sys_wait4, sys_kill,
sys_getuid, sys_getgid, sys_setuid, sys_setgid, sys_geteuid, sys_getegid,
sys_getppid, sys_setsid, sys_exit_group
.PP
\fBDirectory:\fR sys_getcwd, sys_chdir, sys_mkdir, sys_rmdir, sys_getdents64
.PP
\fBNetwork:\fR sys_socket, sys_bind, sys_listen, sys_accept, sys_connect,
sys_sendto, sys_recvfrom, sys_shutdown, sys_setsockopt, sys_getsockopt
.PP
\fBTime:\fR sys_nanosleep, sys_gettimeofday, sys_time, sys_clock_gettime
.PP
\fBSignal:\fR sys_rt_sigaction, sys_rt_sigprocmask, sys_pause, sys_alarm
.PP
\fBMisc:\fR sys_poll, sys_ioctl, sys_select, sys_uname, sys_getrusage,
sys_sysinfo, sys_getrandom
.SH std/net \- NETWORK
Convenience import \(em same as the network functions in \fBstd/sys\fR.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR hpp (1),
.BR hpp-lang (7)
