.TH HPP-LANG 7 "2026-03-23" "H++ 1.0" "H++ Language Reference"
.SH NAME
hpp-lang \- H++ programming language overview
.SH DESCRIPTION
H++ is a statically-typed, natively-compiled language where every value is
.BR bit[n] .
All types are zero-cost aliases resolved at compile time.
.SH TYPES
.PP
The single primitive is \fBbit\fR. Named types are aliases:
.RS
.nf
def byte  bit[8];
def int   bit[32];
def long  bit[64];
.fi
.RE
.PP
Types are equivalent if they have the same bit width. Implicit widening
(small \(-> large) is supported.
.SH VARIABLES
.TS
l l l.
Form	Mutable	Type
_
const x = 42;	No	Inferred
let y = 10;	Yes	Inferred
int z = 100;	Yes	Explicit
int w;	Yes	Zero-init
.TE
.SH FUNCTIONS
.RS
.nf
fn add(a: int, b: int) -> int {
    return a + b;
}

fn main() -> int {
    return 0;
}

// With command line arguments:
fn main(argc: int, argv: long) -> int {
    long arg1 = arg_str(argv, 1);
    return 0;
}
.fi
.RE
.PP
Parameters are immutable. Entry point is \fBfn main() -> int\fR or
\fBfn main(argc: int, argv: long) -> int\fR.
Calling convention: System V AMD64 ABI.
.SS Function Pointers
.RS
.nf
long fp = &my_func;
long result = fp(10, 20);   // indirect call
.fi
.RE
.SH OPERATORS
.PP
Precedence (highest to lowest):
.TS
l l l.
Level	Operators	Description
_
1	* & ! ~ -	Unary (deref, addr, not, bitnot, neg)
2	* / %	Multiply, divide, modulo
3	+ -	Add, subtract
4	<< >>	Shift
5	< <= > >=	Comparison
6	== !=	Equality
7	&	Bitwise AND
8	^	Bitwise XOR
9	|	Bitwise OR
10	&&	Logical AND (short-circuit)
11	||	Logical OR (short-circuit)
12	= += -= *= /= %= etc.	Assignment and compound assignment
.TE
.SS Compound Assignment
.nf
x += 5;  x -= 1;  x *= 2;  x /= 3;  x %= 4;
x &= 0xFF;  x |= 1;  x ^= mask;  x <<= 2;  x >>= 1;
.fi
.SS Increment / Decrement
.nf
i++;  ++i;  i--;  --i;    // all rewrite to i = i +/- 1
.fi
.SS sizeof / offsetof / null
.nf
sizeof(int)                // 4 (compile-time)
sizeof(long)               // 8
offsetof(Point, y)         // byte offset of field y
long p = null;             // 0 as pointer
.fi
.SS Narrowing Cast
.nf
int x = int(long_value);   // truncate 64 -> 32 bits
byte b = byte(int_value);  // truncate 32 -> 8 bits
.fi
.SH ENUM
.RS
.nf
enum TokenKind {
    TOK_PLUS,            // 0
    TOK_MINUS,           // 1
    TOK_STAR = 10,       // 10 (explicit)
    TOK_SLASH            // 11 (auto-increment)
}
.fi
.RE
.PP
Preprocessor replaces member names with integer literals.
.SH TOP-LEVEL CONST
.RS
.nf
const MAX_TOKENS = 1024;
const VERSION = 1;
.fi
.RE
.PP
Replaced with integer literals at compile time. Works outside functions.
Inside functions, \fBconst\fR still creates a local immutable variable.
.SH CONTROL FLOW
.RS
.nf
if (x > 0) { ... } else { ... }
while (n > 0) { n = n - 1; }
for (int i = 0; i < 10; i = i + 1) { ... }
break;
continue;
return expr;
.fi
.RE
.PP
Conditions must be type \fBbit\fR. Use comparison operators on wider types.
.SS Switch
.RS
.nf
switch (val) {
    case 0: println("zero"); break;
    case 1: println("one"); break;
    default: println("other"); break;
}
.fi
.RE
.SH ARRAYS
.PP
Requires \fBimport std/arr;\fR
.RS
.nf
int nums[5];                     // allocate
int primes[] = [2, 3, 5, 7];    // init
int fib[4] = [1, 1, 2, 3];      // size + init

nums[0] = 42;                   // write
int x = nums[0];                // read
int_free(nums, 5);              // free
.fi
.RE
.PP
Works for \fBbyte\fR, \fBint\fR, \fBlong\fR, and custom types (mapped by bit width).
.SH STRINGS
.RS
.nf
println("Hello, World!");
long s = "test";
print_char('A');
print_char('\\n');
s[0]                            // byte access
.fi
.RE
.PP
Escape sequences: \\n \\t \\r \\0 \\\\ \\" \\'
.SH STRUCTS
.RS
.nf
defx Point { int x, int y }

Point p;
p.x = 10;
p.y = 20;
int sum = p.x + p.y;
free(p, 8);
.fi
.RE
.PP
Contiguous C-like memory layout. \fB&x + 4 == &y\fR for 32-bit fields.
.PP
Use \fBoffsetof(Point, y)\fR to get field byte offsets at compile time.
.SH POINTERS
.RS
.nf
int x = 42;
long ptr = &x;        // address-of
int val = *ptr;        // dereference read
*ptr = 99;             // dereference write
.fi
.RE
.SH MACROS
.RS
.nf
macro log(msg) { println(msg) }
macro square(x) { x * x }
.fi
.RE
.PP
Token-level substitution at compile time.
.SH MODULES
.RS
.nf
import std;                   // all stdlib
import std/io;                // single module
import std/{io, fmt, mem};    // multiple
import mylib;                 // user library
link "external.o";            // link .o file
.fi
.RE
.PP
Modules need a \fB.hdef\fR file (declarations) and an implementation
(\fB.asm\fR, \fB.hpp\fR, or \fB.o\fR).
.SH INLINE ASSEMBLY
.RS
.nf
asm linux {
    mov rax, 60
    mov rdi, 0
    syscall
}
.fi
.RE
.PP
NASM Intel syntax. Only the matching target block is compiled.
.SH OPERATOR OVERLOADING
.RS
.nf
opp int + int -> int {
    asm linux { add eax, ebx }
}
.fi
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR hpp (1),
.BR hpp-stdlib (3)
