.TH HPP 1 "2026-03-23" "H++ 1.0" "H++ Compiler"
.SH NAME
hpp \- H++ programming language compiler
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B hpp
.I source.hpp
.RB [ \-o
.IR output ]
.RB [ \-S ]
.RB [ \-t
.IR target ]
.RB [ \-\-dump\-tokens ]
.RB [ \-\-dump\-ast ]
.RB [ \-\-help ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B hpp
compiles H++ source files (.hpp) into native Linux x86-64 executables.
The compiler pipeline is: Lexer \(-> Macros \(-> Parser \(-> Sema \(-> Codegen \(-> NASM \(-> ld \(-> executable.
.PP
H++ is a statically-typed language built on a single primitive:
.BR bit .
All types are zero-cost abstractions over bit-level representations.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-o " output"
Set the output file name. Default: input filename without extension (or with .asm for \-S).
.TP
.B \-S
Output assembly only. Do not assemble or link. Produces a .asm file (NASM Intel syntax).
.TP
.BI \-t " target"
Set compilation target. Currently only
.B linux
is supported (default).
.TP
.B \-\-dump\-tokens
Lex the source and print the token stream to stdout. Does not parse or compile.
.TP
.B \-\-dump\-ast
Lex and parse the source, then print the AST (Abstract Syntax Tree) to stdout.
.TP
.B \-\-help
Print usage information and exit.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Compile and run a program:
.RS
.nf
hpp hello.hpp -o hello
\&./hello
.fi
.RE
.PP
Output assembly only:
.RS
.nf
hpp program.hpp -S -o program.asm
.fi
.RE
.PP
Debug the lexer:
.RS
.nf
hpp program.hpp --dump-tokens
.fi
.RE
.PP
Debug the parser:
.RS
.nf
hpp program.hpp --dump-ast
.fi
.RE
.SH FILES
.TP
.I compiler/stdlib/std_ll.asm
Linux syscall wrappers (73 functions)
.TP
.I compiler/stdlib/std_util.asm
Utility functions (40+ functions)
.TP
.I compiler/stdlib/std/*.hdef
Module definition files for the standard library
.TP
.I compiler/stdlib/std/arr.asm
Array operations library
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.B hpp
requires
.B nasm
(Netwide Assembler) and
.B ld
(GNU linker) to be installed and available in PATH.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Compilation successful.
.TP
.B 1
Compilation failed (syntax error, type error, linker error, etc.).
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR hpp-lang (7),
.BR hpp-stdlib (3),
.BR nasm (1),
.BR ld (1)
.SH AUTHORS
H++ compiler and language design.
